HU AND LI: MASKCRYPT: FEDERATED LEARNING WITH SELECTIVE HOMOMORPHIC ENCRYPTION 223
Fig. 1. Model weights that can be estimated by adversaries under different
encryption schemes.
aggregation process of federated learning is mainly based on
addition of the model updates.
With homomorphic encryption, the clients can obtain the
same aggregation result while the server has no access to
the model updates, which guarantees a high-level of security
because there is no way to conduct inference attacks on the
encrypted model. As illustrated at the middle in Fig.1, if clients
encrypt all the updated model weights, the adversaries have no
choice but to estimate the model weights based on the infor-
mation from previous rounds. For example, if a client chooses
to encrypt the model in a speciﬁc round while the model of
the last round is sent without encryption, adversaries can only
attack on the model weights exposed at last round. And if clients
conduct encryption at every round, only the initial model will
be exposed which is randomly generated, and posts no threats
to data privacy.
However, despite the outstanding security advantage, ho-
momorphic encryption algorithms typically yield signiﬁcantly
larger ciphertext compared with plaintext, which leads to a
formidable communication overhead. While communication
efﬁciency has been the focus of many existing works in the
literature — often presenting marginal improvements only —
homomorphic encryption can easily boost the size of data trans-
mission by hundreds of times[11] depending on the algorithm
used. Considering the inherent size of modern deep learning
models, encrypting all the weights in a model inevitably incurs
unbearable communication overhead.
Therefore, in this paper, we raise a simple question: do we
really have to encrypt all the model weights which can be up
to millions? Or can we just select a part of it for encryption as
presented on the right in Fig.1, but still achieve the same level
of security?
C. Threat Model
Before we proceed to our work, we would like to formally
introduce and justify the threat model in this paper. Follow
existing works in the literature, we assume that the server is
honest-but-curious, which implies the server honestly carries
out the algorithm but tries to learn as much as possible from the
updates received from clients, e.g., performing inference attacks
on the reported model weights.
Most prior work on federated learning with homomorphic
encryption (e.g., [13], [14], [15], [16]) makes the unrealistic
assumption that clients will not collude with the server. This is
because clients share the secret key to decrypt aggregated model
weights. If any client provides this key to the server, the server
can decrypt updates from all clients. In this work, we relax this
assumption by allowing potential client collusion. For example,
some clients may collude by sharing keys with the server or other
clients. We discuss the security implications of such collusion
in SectionV.
III. FRAMEWORK DESIGN
In this section, we present how selective homomorphic en-
cryption can be implemented from a straw man solution called
Individual Masking, where each client individually chooses
which part of the model updates shall be encrypted. We then
analyze the shortcomings of such a method, which motivates
the design of mask consensus. We ﬁnally present our solution
called MASKCRYPT.
A. Individual Masking
At the end of roundt, a client k ﬁnishes the training and
obtains a locally updated modelwk
t . Before it uploadswk
t to the
server for aggregation, the client can choose to encrypt a part of
wk
t according to an encryption maskmk. We deﬁne the mask as
a subset of indices. For example, assuming the model has a total
of N model weights, then a valid maskmk has to satisfy
mk ⊂{ 0,1,2,...,N },
|mk| = ρN,
where |mk| is the size of mk, and 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 represents the
encrypt ratio that controls the number of encrypted weights,
i.e., no encryption whenρ =0 , and all model updates will be
encrypted whenρ =1 .
With the encryption mask, a natural idea to encrypt the model
is simply to replace the target model weights by their corre-
sponding ciphertext after encryption, i.e., clientk can encrypt
wk
t [i] by
wk
t [i]=
{wk
t [i],i / ∈ mk
ENC
(
wk
t [i]
)
,i ∈ mk (2)
where ENC(·) is the homomorphic encryption scheme adopted
in this FL session.
Consider a simple case that each client chooses its own
individual mask m1,m2,...,m k to encrypt the model, then
some of the weights in a speciﬁc position can be encrypted
while others remain plaintext. As long as we choose a homo-
morphic encryption algorithm that supports addition and scalar
multiplication, the server can still aggregate them with(1),e v e n
though the model updates are in a hybrid form of encrypted and
unencrypted values. The server can then send the aggregation
results back to clients and start the next round of training.
Taking the advantage of homomorphic encryption, it appears
that a complete federated learning session with mask encryption
can be easily implemented with the procedures above. But
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.