232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025
TABLE III
THE PERPLEXITY OF EXPOSED MODEL WEIGHTS OF DISTILGPT2 UNDER
DIFFERENT ENCRYPTION SCHEME
But even with only 20% of encrypted weights, the commu-
nication size is still up to 2.4 GB, and the corresponding cryp-
tographic operations takes a few minutes to ﬁnish. Therefore,
an essential question is how many model weights need to be
encrypted for 𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2 to be secure. Since the performance
of existing membership inference attack on transformer mod-
els [20] largely depends on a user-deﬁned threshold (i.e., one
can easily adjust the threshold value to obtain desired attack
result), we use a more objective metric, the model perplexity
of the exposed model weights, to evaluate the security —-
higher perplexity means the model has less knowledge on the
training data. As presented in TableIII, without any protection,
the perplexity of𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2 decreases to 29.31 on the clients’
training data. Similar perplexities were observed on the ran-
dom mask encryption scheme across different encrypt ratios. In
contrast, the perplexity of MASKCRYPT is signiﬁcantly higher
with the same encrypt ratio, which means the model weights
of MASKCRYPT have a worse performance on the local training
data, which implies that they are safer to be exposed.
Notice that if we adopt the full weights encryption scheme,
only the initial, pre-trained model weights from HuggingFace
will be exposed, whose perplexity on clients’ training data is
92.35, while the perplexity of MASKCRYPT is 97.53 with an
encrypt ratio of 10%. In other words, we can achieve the same
level of security as full weights encryption, from the perspective
of perplexity, by only encrypting 10% of the weights.
An interesting observation is that the perplexity of MASK-
CRYPTcan be even higher than full encryption with more weights
being encrypted. The reason is that with full encryption scheme,
the perplexity is evaluated on the initial model because the server
has no access to any model weights during the FL training pro-
cess. The initial model performs poorly, but it is still a consistent
pre-trained model. Yet, with MASKCRYPT, the exposed model
weights are not consistent: some weights come from roundt, and
other weights come from some other rounds. Such inconsistency
corrupts the model, leading to an even worse performance than
the initial model.
VII. RELATED WORK
Federated learning allows multiple clients to collaboratively
train a machine learning model without sharing their private data,
yet recent studies[4] show that the model weights or gradients
exchanged between clients and server exposed the privacy of
clients under various privacy attacks, such as membership in-
ference [2], [21], feature inference[22] and even reconstructing
input data from model updates[3].
Many strategies have been proposed to protect clients against
attacks of such exposure. One way is to perturb the model
updates with noises such that an adversarial can barely learn any-
thing from it. For example, based on the DP-SGD algorithm[5],
McMahan et al. extends differential privacy to federated learning
and proposed DP-FedAvg[6] to inject differential privacy noise
during the local training phase. However, both our experimental
results and the empirical studies in[7], [15] show that differential
privacy noises inevitably degrade the model accuracy, which
contradicts the fundamental goal of training a high-performance
model in federated learning.
Secure aggregation[23] is another choice that allows a server
to compute the sum of data vectors from clients in a secure
manner, i.e., the server learns nothing but the aggregation result.
SAFELearn [24] further improves the communication efﬁciency
of secure aggregation in federated learning. But still, they allow
the server to see the plaintext aggregated model or gradients,
based on which the information about the trained model or client
data can be inferred by adversarial entities.
In contrast, homomorphic encryption outperforms the afore-
mentioned methods in the following aspects: ﬁrst, the model
updates remain unchanged after encryption and decryption,
so there is no worry about any accuracy degradation. Recent
works [14], [16] attempt to combine federated learning with
homomorphic operations to provide a secure environment.
However, homomorphic encryption introduces a signiﬁcant
amount of communication overhead due to the inﬂated cipher-
text size as we presented in the evaluation. Some encryption
algorithm-level optimizations, such as[25], [26], can be adopted
to reduce the ciphertext size. More speciﬁcally, in the context
of federated learning, Liu et al. proposed BatchCrypt[12] to
encode a batch of quantized gradients into a long integer and
encrypt it together, which reduces the communication size in
federated learning by a substantial margin. Jiang et al. intro-
duced FLASHE [11] as a tailored homomorphic encryption
scheme for cross-silo federated learning. But all of these works
choose to encrypt all the model weights or gradients without
considering encryption sparsity, i.e., how many information we
need to encrypt before we can claim it’s safe enough. Therefore,
MASKCRYPT can be combined with these techniques to further
reduce the communication overhead.
While early work focused solely on one aggregation scheme,
recent years have seen more efforts to combine multiple secure
methods to provide better performance in terms of privacy and
training efﬁciency. For example, Kairouz et al.[27] discretize
the model updates and adds discrete Gaussian noise before
performing secure aggregation. Similarly, Stevens et al.[27]
combine secure aggregation with differential privacy to ensure
end-to-end privacy in federated learning. Zheng et al. [28]
introduce a lightweight secure aggregation protocol, and use
quantization-based model compression to reduce the communi-
cation overhead. These works still operate on the entire model
updates, where computation and communication complexities
are determined by the vector sizes needing aggregation. There-
fore, MASKCRYPT’s ﬁndings could also be combined with them,
i.e., by reducing the size of the aggregating vectors to further
improve training efﬁciency.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.