228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025
B. Encrypted Model Weights
MASKCRYPT aims to protect client’s data privacy by strate-
gically mask out a small portion of the model updates from
adversaries’ access. Therefore, the security of MASKCRYPT is
totally depended on weather the selected weights can remain
conﬁdential throughout the entire federated learning process,
i.e., we can be formally deﬁned the objective that MASKCRYPT
trying to achieve as follows:
Deﬁnition 1: Encrypted Model Conﬁdentiality: Let
wk
enc,1,wk
enc,2,...,w k
enc,N denote the model weights that an
honest client k encrypts at each round. Throughout the entire
federated learning process, no parties other than itself can gain
access to those encrypted weights.
The encryption mechanism in MASKCRYPT works like a black
box, i.e., MASKCRYPT feeds a data vector to the encrypt function
for the ciphertext, and feeds ciphertext to the decrypt function
for the plaintext models. Therefore, MASKCRYPT doesn’t mod-
ify the cryptographic protocols of the existing homomorphic
encryption algorithms - much of its security properties can thus
be directly inherited from the adopted encryption algorithm.
However, the interaction between the server and clients to enable
MASKCRYPT’s partial model encryption could raise potential
security concerns, and we address these concerns within the
following theorem.
Theorem 2: If the aggregation server is honese-but-curious,
and the homomorphic encryption used by MASKCRYPT is se-
mantically secure (IND-CPA), Given the server colluding with at
most K −2 clients, MASKCRYPT achieves the encrypted model
conﬁdentiality in Deﬁnition1.
Proof: AM ASKCRYPT client kwill generate its own key pairs
(pkk,skk) where the public keypkk will be distributed among all
clients. With the possibility of colluding, we assume the server
has the access to the public keypkk of clientk, i.e., the server
has access to an encryption oracle of clientk to conduct chosen
plaintext attacks. However, since the homomorphic encryption
scheme adopted by MASKCRYPT is IND-CPA secure, potential
adversaries (the colluding server and clients) cannot distinguish
between encryptions of any two messages. Therefore, the en-
crypted weights cannot be accessed without clientk’s secret
key skk.
Additionally, adversaries have access to the decrypted aggre-
gation results by colluding with clients. This is inevitable in
federated learning since each client stores a full copy of the
aggregated model. This allows adversaries to try to infer the
encrypted weights of honest clients.
Let C and H denote the corrupted and honest clients respec-
tively, and|C|+ |H| = K. Then according to thehonest-but-
curious assumption, the server will honest perform the aggre-
gation and send the following aggregation result to client for
decryption:
∑
i∈C
piwi
enc,t +
∑
j∈H
pjwj
enc,t.
Since adversaries have full access to the encrypted weights of
the corrupted clients and aggregation results, thereby they can
compute the plain text of∑
j∈H pjwj
enc,t.I f|H| =1 , adversaries
obtain the plaintext weights of the one honest client. However,
as long as|H|≥ 2, adversaries can only obtain the aggregated
weights rather than the original weights of each honest client.
Therefore, given the server colludes with at most K −2
clients, MASKCRYPT achieves model conﬁdentiality against
honest-but-curious adversaries. If|H| =1 , adversaries obtain
the plaintext weights of the one honest client. However, as
long as |H|≥ 2, adversaries can only obtain the aggregated
weights rather than the original weights of each honest client.
Therefore, given the server colludes with at mostN −2 clients,
MASKCRYPT achieves model conﬁdentiality. □
VI. PERFORMANCE EVA L UAT I O N
A. Experimental Settings
Implementation: Our implementation of MASKCRYPT can be
separated into two parts: model learning and homomorphic
encryption. Our model learning part is built upon PLATO1,a
scalable framework for federated learning research. And the
source code of MASKCRYPT is released as a public example
of PLATO. It’s worth noting that mask consensus might incur
considerable communication overhead by directly exchanging
lists of indices. Therefore, the encryption masks are transmitted
in the form of bitmaps where each position is represented by one
bit.
On the other hand, homomorphic encryption, decryption and
computation are implemented with TenSEAL[17], an industrial-
grade library for homomorphic operations on tensors based on
Microsoft SEAL2. We adopt CKKS as our default homomorphic
encryption algorithm, with a polynomial modulus degree of
8192 and coefﬁcient modulus sizes[60,40,40,60].
The encryption context contains a private key and a public
key, where both of them are shared among all the clients and
the server can only access the public key to do the aggregation
in practice. But for evaluation purposes, we allow the server to
decrypt the weights to evaluate testing accuracy when necessary.
Dataset and models:We conduct all our experiments on the
following four datasets:
𝖢𝖨𝖥𝖠𝖱 −10. A commonly used image recognition dataset,
𝖢𝖨𝖥𝖠𝖱 −10 contains 60,000 color images with the shape of
32 ×32. The dataset falls in 10 different classes where each
class has 6,000 images. We use 50,000 images for training and
the remaining 10,000 for testing.
𝖬𝖭𝖨𝖲𝖳. The well-known handwritten digits dataset including
60,000 images for training and 10,000 for testing.
𝖯𝗎𝗋𝖼𝗁𝖺𝗌𝖾. We adopt a simpliﬁed Purchase dataset from[2],
including 197,324 records and each record has 600 binary fea-
tures, where each feature indicates whether the customer buys
a speciﬁc product or not. These records are labeled with 100
classes and each class represents a different purchase style. We
use 80% of the records for training and 20% for testing.
𝖳𝖾𝗑𝖺𝗌. Similar to Purchase, Texas is also a preprocessed
dataset from [2], which contains 67,330 hospital records and
6,170 binary features with 100 labels.
1https://github.com/TL-System/plato
2https://github.com/Microsoft/SEAL
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.