222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025
In this paper, we consider an important question: Do we have
to encrypt all the model weights? An intuition that naturally
arises is to encrypt only a portion of the model weights, and yet
manage to achieve the same level of security. Starting from this
intuition, we have designed and implemented MASKCRYPT,a
new mechanism designed to provide an “affordable” security in
practical federated learning systems. A highlight in MASKCRYPT
is our selective homomorphic encryption mechanism, which
allows a client to selectively apply homomorphic encryption
on a subset of the model weights. By reducing the number of
model weights to be encrypted, we aim to explore the trade-off
between security and practicality and to reduce the communica-
tion overhead by a substantial margin, yet still making sure that
the training session is secure enough against malicious attacks.
Highlights of our original contributions are as follows.
First, to the best of our knowledge, MASKCRYPT is the ﬁrst
federated learning system that explores the encryption sparsity,
i.e., encrypting not all but part of the model updates. Speciﬁcally,
when the local training phase is ﬁnished, the model updates
will be sifted into unencrypted and encrypted ones through
an encryption mask, where the encrypted ones will be handed
to a homomorphic encryption algorithm before sending to the
server and unencrypted ones remain untouched. MASKCRYPT is
agnostic to the encryption algorithm; any existing encryption
mechanism can be adopted.
Second, clients may choose different encryption masks due
to their own privacy concerns. However, considering both com-
putation and communication efﬁciency, we argue that all clients
should share a common encryption mask. To meet this require-
ment, we introduce a special mechanism, calledMask Consen-
sus, to help clients reach an agreement on the ﬁnal encryption
mask.
Third, to protect the privacy of client as much as possible
within a limited encryption quota, we propose agradient-guided
mechanism to help clients select the encryption mask. We formu-
late the encryption mask as a model delta applied on the trained
model weights. By choosing the mask whose corresponding
deltas are the closest to the gradient direction, we can maximize
the possible increase of the loss value of the exposed model
weights, thereby obfuscating the training trace on client’s private
data.
Finally, We have implemented and evaluated MASKCRYPT
in an open-source federated learning framework called PLATO.
Compared with full weights encryption, MASKCRYPT reduces
the communication overhead by up to 4.15× with an encrypt
ratio of 20%. To evaluate the security performance, We have
performed two well-known attacks, membership inference at-
tack and data reconstruction attack, on MASKCRYPT.O u re x -
perimental results have shown clear and convincing evidence
that MASKCRYPT can achieve similar protection as full weight
encryption, but only encrypts a small part of the model weights.
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows.
The preliminaries of membership inference attack, federated
learning and homomorphic encryption are introduced in Sec-
tion II. Then we detail the system design of MASKCRYPT and
the mask consensus mechanism in SectionIII, and elaborate
the gradient-guided mask selection algorithm in SectionIV.
The security analysis and evaluation results will be presented
in SectionsV and VI. And lastly, we highlight the originality of
MASKCRYPTunder the comparison with related works in Section
VII and conclude this paper in SectionVIII.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Federated Learning
We consider a general cross-device federated learning sce-
nario where K clients collaboratively train a model with the
help of a central server. The training session starts with an initial
model, w0, on the server. At roundt, the server will send the
global model weightswt−1 to each clientk. Each client deﬁnes a
loss functionL(w,Dk) on the modelwand its own datasetDK,
and whenwt−1 arrives, it will perform an optimization algorithm
(e.g., SGD) for a few epochs to obtain a locally updated model,
wk
t , which is then sent to the server. After the server receives
the updates from all its selected clients, it produces an updated
global model using an aggregation algorithm like below, and
uses it for the next round:
wt =
∑
k=1,...,K
pkwk
t (1)
Intuitively, federated learning protects data privacy by keep-
ing the data secured locally and only exposing model weights to
the server. However, recent work has shown that the unprotected
information exchange between the server and clients still leaves a
huge attack surface for adversaries[4]. For example, based solely
on model outputs, a membership inference attack can determine
whether a speciﬁc data sample appeared in the training set, which
could be a major threat to sensitive data.
Initially proposed to be a black-box attack, the risk of member-
ship inference attack is even higher in federated learning for two
reasons. First, the model needs to adapt to the dataset from all the
clients, which means the capacity of the model has to be greater
than the dataset of any single client. Therefore, the over-ﬁtting
problem is more likely to happen during the local training phase,
thereby leaving more opportunities for the attacker.Second,t h e
server has white-box access to the model weights trained by each
client, which means there is no way to hide the model output.
Therefore, a vanilla FL training session without any protection
on the shared model weights makes the participating client a
perfect victim to membership inference attacks.
B. Homomorphic Encryption
To defend against attacks targeted on the exposed model,
a natural idea is encrypting the weights to protect original
model weights against adversaries. Homomorphic encryption is
a special family of encryption algorithms for numerical data,
e.g., CKKS [9] for ﬂoating numbers, as well as Paillier [8]
and BFV [10] for integers. Homomorphic encryption allows
operations like addition and multiplication of plaintext numbers
to be evaluated on the encrypted ciphertext with some special
functions, and only those who have the secret key can decipher
the result. Such a property makes homomorphic encryption an
appealing security solution in federated learning because the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.