HU AND LI: MASKCRYPT: FEDERATED LEARNING WITH SELECTIVE HOMOMORPHIC ENCRYPTION 225
Algorithm 1: Mask Consensus.
Input: Mask proposals from clientsm1,...,m K, encrypt
ratio ρ
Output: Final mask ¯m;
1: Initialize m′as a list of zeros of lengthρN ×K
2: for k=1,2,...,K do
3: m′[k :: M]= mk ⊿Interleave the mask proposals
4: end for
5: Remove the duplicated elements inm′
6: Select top ρN elements ofm′as ﬁnal mask¯m
7: return ¯m
C. Proposed Framework
With the mask consensus mechanism, we are now ready to
present the workﬂow of our proposed MASKCRYPT framework,
which can be divided into following steps:
Setup: To prevent compromised keys from one client threat-
ening others, MASKCRYPT has each clientk generate a public-
secret key pair (pkk,skk) using a homomorphic encryption
scheme before training begins. The public keyspkk are syn-
chronized among all clients. This allows encrypting different
weight subsets with different client keys.
Local Training:For each roundt, the server sends the current
global model weightswt−1 to each clientk. Clientk trains the
model on its local datasetDk, obtaining updated weightswk
t .
Mask Consensus: Client k analyzes wk
t to determine which
entries are most sensitive, and computes a mask proposalmk
based on the current model. Clients send proposals to the server
for mask consensus, yielding the ﬁnal mask¯m.
Model Encryption: After reaching consensus on which
weights to encrypt, clients encrypt the selected weights
wk
t [i] | i ∈ ¯m using all clients’ public keyspkj. Speciﬁcally,
each client k splits ¯m evenly into K subsets I1,...,I K such
that ⋃K
j=1 Ij =¯m and |I1| = ··· = |IK|. For each subsetIj,
client k encrypts the corresponding elements ofwk
t :
wk
t,Ij = ENC(wk
t [i],pkj) ∀i ∈ Ij
Where pkj is clientj’s public key for subsetIj. This results in
K encrypted subsetswk
t,Ij for each clientk, each encrypted with
a different keypkj.
Along with unencrypted weights, this forms the model update
client k sends to the server:
{wk
t,Ij | j =1 ,...,K }∪{ wk
t [i] |∀ i/∈ ¯m}
Model Aggregation: Since the encrypted and unencrypted
weights are aligned in the clients’ model updates, the server can
aggregate them separately. It performs homomorphic operations
on the encrypted weights wt,Ij and direct operations on the
unencrypted weightswt[i]. This yields:
{wt,Ij | j =1 ,...,K }∪{ wt[i] |∀ i/∈ ¯m}
Where wt[i] |∀ i/∈ ¯m contains aggregation results for unen-
crypted weights in plaintext form. However, eachwt,Ij remains
encrypted under clientj’s public key. One more decryption step
is required to obtain the ﬁnal aggregated weights.
Model Decryption:The server sends each encryptedwt,Ij to
client j, who decrypts withskj and returns decrypted values.
The server now holds fully aggregatedwt for this round, which
can be used to start the learning of next round.
As a brief summary, MASKCRYPT implements the selective
homomorphic encryption in federated learning, where each
client determines which part of the local model weights should
be encrypted by anencryption mask. Due to the problems of
individual masking, we propose amask consensus mechanism
to obtain a ﬁnal mask shared by all the clients. Next, we will
introduce how each client can select an encryption mask within
a limited encryption quota.
IV . GRADIENT-GUIDED MASK SELECTION
A. Problem Formulation
In the special design of MASKCRYPT, parts of the model
updates are always encrypted. This means adversaries can the-
oretically never retrieve the full model weights from clients
to conduct malicious attacks. Therefore, adversaries have no
choice but to observe the unencrypted, or exposed, model
weights to estimate a full copy of clients’ raw model updates for
attack purposes. To this end, we consider model encryption as
a client-side behavior of managing the weights that are exposed
to the server or other potential adversaries. This strategically
minimizes empirical security concerns by deciding which parts
of the model weights should be protected while others can be
safely publicized.
Let wk
exp,t denote the model weights that clientk exposes at
round t. Before federated learning starts, we setwk
exp,0 to the
initial model weightsw0 for each client. Throughout training,
clients choose different encryption masks to decide which parts
of the model weights to expose in each round. This leads to an it-
erative updating process of the exposed weights. Note thatwk
exp,t
is not equivalent to the model updates that clientk sends to the
server in roundt. This is because only the unencrypted weights
are exposed, while the encrypted weights are not exposed in this
round, but were exposed in previous rounds.
When the latest global model weightswt−1 arrive at client
k in round t, the client needs to update the exposed model
weights from the last round before its local training starts. This
is becausewt−1 is not encrypted, and an adversary can use these
new weights to replace the old ones in the exposed model of the
previous roundwk
exp,t−1. We denote the exposed weights in this
phase as ˜wk
exp,t to distinguish it from the ﬁnal exposed weights
of this round. It is deﬁned as:
˜wk
exp,t[i]=
{wt−1[i],i is not encrypted
wk
exp,t−1[i], otherwise .
Conceptually, ˜wk
exp,t[i] represents the weights that are exposed
before local training starts. As soon as client k ﬁnishes its
training and obtains the locally updated modelwk
t for this round,
an encryption maskmk will be applied onwk
t before sending it to
the server for aggregation. There is no doubt that the unencrypted
weights will be exposed; therefore, the ﬁnal exposed model
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.