HU AND LI: MASKCRYPT: FEDERATED LEARNING WITH SELECTIVE HOMOMORPHIC ENCRYPTION 227
Algorithm 2: Gradient-Guided Mask Selection.
Input: ˜wk
exp,t: Exposed model weights;wk
t : Local model
weights; Dk: Local dataset;
Output: Encryption maskm;
1: Compute gradients g = ∇L(wk
t ,Dk)
2: Compute model delta δ(1)= ˜wk
exp,t −wk
t
3: Compute element-wise multiplication v = g ⊙ δ(1)
4: Sort v in descending order and obtain indicesvind
5: Select top ρN elements ofvind as the mask proposal
mk return mk
means:
δ(p) ·g>δ (mk) ·g
⇒ δ(mk) ·g −v[i]+ v[j] >δ (mk) ·g
⇒ v[j] >v [i].
However, since the choice ofm is based on the descending
order of each element inv, and the fact thati ∈ mk and j/∈ mk
implies v[j] ≤ v[i] which makes a contradiction to the above
inequality. Therefore the above theorem is true. □
In summary, we have introduced how each client selects the
encryption mask from the perspective of maximizing the loss
value of the exposed model weights. As the original problem
presented in(5) is almost impossible to solve due to its inherent
complexity, we reformulated the encryption mask as a model
delta, and proposed agradient-guided mask selectionmethod
based on the intuition that the loss value increases the fastest
along the gradient direction.
C. Effectiveness Analysis
Previously in(5), we formulated the selection of the encryp-
tion mask as maximizing the loss function with respect to the
exposed model weights wk
exp,t at round t. However, with an
abstract loss function that is only known to be differentiable, it
is impossible to ﬁnd the exact optimal encryption mask without a
brute force search. Therefore, we aim to maximize the possibility
that a higher loss value can be achieved with our proposed
method. If we further make the following assumption on the
loss function:
Assumption 2: The loss function L(w; D) is convex with
respect to the model parametersw for any datasetD.
Then by the convexity ofL, we have the following inequality
holds:
L(wk
exp,t; Dk) −L(wk
t ; Dk)
≥∇ L(wk
t ; Dk)(wk
exp,t −wk
t )
≥ δ(mk) ·g (9)
where the last inequality is obtained from(6). MoveL(wk
t ; Dk)
to the right side, then we have
L(wk
exp,t; Dk) ≥ L(wk
t ; Dk)+ δ(mk) ·g. (10)
In other words, the loss value on the exposed model weights
L(wk
exp,t; Dk) is lower bounded by the right hand side term,
which depends onδ(mk) ·g. Note thatwk
t is the locally trained
model weights which means it is a constant value after the local
training phase, consequently, the local loss valueL(wk
t ; Dk) is
also constant. Then by increasing the value ofδ(mk) ·g,w ea r e
actually raising the lower bound ofL(wk
exp,t; Dk), leading to a
greater chance to get a higher loss value on the exposed model
weights.
As we have shown in Theorem1, the encryption mask gener-
ated by our gradient-guided method is guaranteed to maximize
the dot product value. Therefore, the effectiveness of Algo-
rithm 2 can be given by the following corollary.
Corollary 1: Let ˆmk denote the encryption mask generated
by Algorithm 2, then its correspondingδ(ˆmk) maximizes the
lower bound ofL(wk
exp,t; Dk) in (10).
Even though our proposed method does not directly maximize
the loss value as formulated in(5), it is able to maximize its lower
bound, and we will show in the evaluation that such ability will
be translated into a robust protection against adversary attacks.
Remember that in SectionIII-B,w ea s s u m et h a tt h em a s ki s
sorted by the importance such that the mask consensus mecha-
nism can attend the preference of each client while selecting the
ﬁnal mask. In this section, we showed that such importance can
be quantitatively measured by the element-wise multiplication
between δ(mk) and gradientg, where a greater value contributes
more to the ﬁnal dot product result, and consequently increases
the lower bound mentioned in inequality(10).
V. SECURITY ANALYSIS
A. Mask Selection
Compared with traditional homomorphic encryption solu-
tions, MASKCRYPT introduces extra interaction between server
and clients to synchronize the masks, which raises another
concern: does the encryption mask leak information about the
encrypted weights?
For clientk, Assume theith weight is encrypted, i.e.,i ∈ m,
and j is an arbitrary unencrypted weight. According to Algo-
rithm 2, the only thing that adversaries can learn about the
encrypted weight is that its corresponding delta has a greater
multiplication value with the gradient, which can be formally
summarized by the following inequality:
g[i]
(
˜wk
exp,t[i] −wk
t [i]
)
≥ g[j]
(
˜wk
exp,t[j] −wk
t [j]
)
.
And it can be turned into
wk
t [i] ≤ ˜wk
exp,t[i] − g[j]
g[i]
(
˜wk
exp,t[j] −wk
t [j]
)
. (11)
The above inequality gives an upper bound of the encrypted
weights, where ˜wk
exp,t[i], ˜wk
exp,t[j] and wk
t [j] are exposed to
server. But gradient g is locally computed and not revealed
at all, which means the upper bound cannot be evaluated by
adversaries, not to mention the exact value of encrypted weights.
Therefore, we believe there is no trivial method to breach data
privacy from the indices of encrypted weights until further attack
research is speciﬁcally designed and targeted on it.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.