226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025
weights of this round can be estimated by
wk
exp,t[i]=
{wk
t [i],i / ∈ mk
˜wk
exp,t[i],i ∈ mk . (4)
Apparently, with different encryption maskmk comes dif-
ferent combinations of the exposed model weights, and we
wish to ﬁnd the one that minimizes the risk of such exposure.
In federated learning, such a risk mainly comes from the fact
that the model weights trained on local dataset are prone to
memorization of the private training data samples[4], which
gives adversaries the opportunity to conduct attacks, such as
membership inference and feature inference.
Therefore, we conclude that the choice of the encryption mask
should be able to “untrain” the exposed model. For example, the
purpose of local training is to minimize the loss value of the
model weights on the local dataset and to make the model more
accurate. Therefore it would be ideal to choose an encryption
mask whose corresponding exposed modelwk
exp,t has a higher
loss value. In this way, the exposed model can behavior like not
being trained on the private dataset under adversarial attacks.
Based on the above intuition, we can formulate the selection
of encryption mask as the following optimization problem:
max
m
L(wk
exp,t,Dk)
s.t. m k ⊂{ 1,2,...,N },
|mk| = ρN, (5)
where N is the total number of model weights. The ﬁrst con-
straint indicates thatm is a subset of the model weight indices.
And the second constraint limits the length of mask, which
ensures that the number of weights to be encrypted is limited
to a preset ratioρ.
But unfortunately, this optimization problem is almost impos-
sible to solve. For machine learning models, it’s hard to obtain an
explicit expression of the loss function, which means we cannot
ﬁnd an analytical solution to Problem(5). The total number of
all the possible masks is
(N
M
)
; and consider that the number of
model weights can be up to millions for modern deep learning
models, it is not feasible in practice to ﬁnd the single mask that
achieves the highest loss value in such a huge searching space.
Therefore, rather than directly seeking the solution to problem
(5), we turn to ﬁnding an encryption mask that has a greater
chance of a higher loss value.
B. Gradient-Guided Mask Selection
If we deﬁne δ(mk) as a function of maskmk that can be
computed by
δ(mk)[i]=
{ ˜wk
exp,t[i] −wk
t [i],i ∈ mk
0,i / ∈ mk .
We can then simplify(4) by
wk
exp,t = wk
t + δ(mk). (6)
This transformation shows that each mask corresponds to a
model delta, and applying an encryption mask is mathematically
equivalent to adding a delta to the model weightswk
t . Therefore,
Problem (5) can be interpreted as ﬁnding a model delta that can
maximize the loss function if added towk
t .
Based on the intuition of gradient descent algorithm, to max-
imize the loss function, we can ascend the model weights on the
gradient direction. Letg denote the gradients of current model
weights on the local dataset such thatg = ∇L(wk
t ,Dk).T o
make sure the encryption mask has the best chance of increasing
the loss value of the exposed model weights, we can choose the
one which is the closest to the gradient direction.
For each maskmk, we can divide its correspondingδ(mk)
into two components:
δ(mk)= δ(mk)g + δ(mk)⊥g, (7)
where δ(mk)g is the projection ofδ(mk) on the gradient di-
rection, and δ(mk)⊥g is perpendicular to the gradient. From
the perspective of the loss value, we would like to maximize
the length of the projection∥ δ(mk)g ∥ because in this way,
adding the delta towk
t implies a larger step of ascending on the
gradient direction. Therefore, we can turn mask selection into
the following optimization problem:
max
mk
∥ δ(mk)g ∥
s.t. m k ⊂{ 1,2,...,N },
|mk| = ρN, (8)
where the optimization target can be computed by
∥ δ(mk)g ∥= δ(mk) ·g
∥ g ∥ .
Since ∥ g ∥is a constant that can be removed without affecting
the optimization problem, all we need to do is to maximize the
dot product between the delta and gradient.
Let δ(1) denote the model delta when all the model weights
are encrypted, and v denote the element-wise multiplication
results ofδ(1) and g, such that
δ(1)= ˜wk
exp,t −wk
t ,
v = g ⊙ δ(1).
Then we haveδ(mk) ·g = ∑
i=1...N v[i]. To maximize it, we
can sortvin descending order and obtain the sorted indicesvind,
then the ﬁrstρN indices represent the positions that contribute
most to the dot product result. Therefore, the client can naturally
select the topρN elements invind as the solution to Problem(8).
This method is referred to asgradient-guided mask selection
because the mask is determined by the gradient at the current
round. A step-by-step procedure is summarized in Algorithm2,
and we show the correctness of the proposed method by the
following theorem.
Theorem 1: The mask mk generated by Algorithm2 is the
solution to Problem(8).
Proof: We prove it by contradiction. Assume the above theo-
rem is not true, which means there exists two indicesi ∈ mk
and j/∈ mk, and if we replace i by j we can get a new
mask p = mk −{i}+ j such thatδ(p) ·g>δ (mk) ·g, which
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.