230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025
Fig. 4. Training speed with simulated wall clock time.
Fig. 5. Attack accuracy under the membership inference attack.
𝖯𝗎𝗋𝖼𝗁𝖺𝗌𝖾, and𝖳𝖾𝗑𝖺𝗌 datasets, the training speed will be 17.1×,
13.2×, and 18.5× slower respectively, which leaves a huge
space for improvement using MASKCRYPT. For example, with an
encryption ratio of 10%,M ASKCRYPT can speed up the training
on the𝖯𝗎𝗋𝖼𝗁𝖺𝗌𝖾 dataset by 4.8×.
On the other hand, we also compare MASKCRYPT against
using differential privacy with ϵ=5 0 and δ =1 0−5, which
provides a security guarantee without extra communication
overhead. We can see that the perturbation of differential privacy
noise signiﬁcantly affects model accuracy for all four datasets.
For the 𝖳𝖾𝗑𝖺𝗌 dataset, the test accuracy even degrades after
reaching a maximum accuracy at around 45%, which is obvi-
ously not acceptable in federated learning.
Security under membership inference attacks: Finally, we
evaluate the security of MASKCRYPT under membership infer-
ence attacks. We choose two encrypt ratio ofρ =0 .05 and 0.25.
The attack accuracy results presented in Fig.5 verify that we
can still achieve a high-level of security without encrypting all
the model updates in federated learning. For the𝖬𝖭𝖨𝖲𝖳 and
𝖢𝖨𝖥𝖠𝖱 −10 datasets, even if we only encrypt 5% of the model
weights, we can still reduce the attack accuracy to about 50%.
The attack accuracies for the𝖯𝗎𝗋𝖼𝗁𝖺𝗌𝖾 and 𝖳𝖾𝗑𝖺𝗌 datasets are
slightly higher. But if we increase the encrypt ratio to 0.25, the
attack accuracies can still be reduced to merely random guessing.
We also compare our proposed gradient-guided mask se-
lection algorithm with a random masking scheme, where the
encryption mask is randomly generated at each round. Our
experimental results show that such a random scheme is as
vulnerable as unencrypted, suffering from a high attack accuracy
TABLE II
THE ACCURACY OFEXPOSED MODEL EV ALUATED ONTRAINING SET
under membership inference. Such a comparison veriﬁes that
the encryption mask selected by our proposed method does
contribute to the protection of data privacy.
To understand why our method works, we further evaluate
the accuracy of the exposed model on a client’s private training
set, and present the results in TableII. With a random mask, the
exposed model can still reach a high accuracy up to 98.6% on
Purchase dataset, which means even with masking encryption,
the exposed model is still overﬁtted to the private training data
and outputs the predictions of training samples with a conﬁ-
dence that is high enough to be captured by the attack model.
In contrast, with the same encryption ratio, MASKCRPYT can
reduce such accuracy to as low as 2.5%. Hence, nothing from
the training can be inferred under attack.
Membership inference attack is a well-known practical attack
due to its low data requirements and high accuracy across various
model types. Traditional protection methods typically block
access to the entire set of original model weights. In contrast,
MASKCRYPT provides the insight that obscuring only a small
part of the model weights is sufﬁcient to protect clients’ data
from membership inference attacks. More importantly, we have
shown that the exposed model weights of MASKCRYPT exhibit
very low accuracy on clients’ training data. This eliminates
traces that the model was trained on speciﬁc datasets, potentially
making it robust against other adversary attacks.
Security under data reconstruction attack: In addition to
evaluating MASKCRYPT against membership inference attacks,
we also tested its ability to defend against data reconstruction
attacks. These attacks aim to reconstruct private input data
from model updates in federated learning. We followed the
approach from[3], which has been shown to yield high-quality
reconstructed images. Speciﬁcally, a local model is trained on a
single image for 5 steps. The attacker then attempts to recover
the original input image from the model updates.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.