224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025
Fig. 2. Ciphertext size compared with unencrypted.
unfortunately, there are two major problems with individual
masking. First, the result of any computation that involves
encrypted numbers will also be encrypted, which could increase
the communication overhead if different encryption masks are
adopted. Assume that there are only two clients:A and B.I f
client A chooses to encrypt the ﬁrst half of the model weights
while clientB encrypts the remaining half, their model updates
can still be processed on the server, but all the weights will
be encrypted after aggregation. This doubles the ciphertext size
when the server dispatches the global model in the next round.
Second, there is an implicit assumption in(2) that the model
weights are encrypted separately, such that we can precisely
extract the ciphertext of the model weight at a speciﬁc position
and aggregate it with its counterparts from other clients. But such
a one-by-one scheme is not practical, especially for large-scale
encryption over weights in deep learning models. In practice,
most de facto homomorphic solutions rely on the batching
technique [9], [12] to reduce the ciphertext size, i.e., encrypting
multiple numbers in one single ciphertext.
To back up our claim, we conducted a measurement study
about three commonly used homomorphic encryption methods
including Paillier, CKKS, and BFV . Both CKKS and BFV
support vector-level encryption and beneﬁt from batching tech-
niques, while Paillier can only encrypt numbers one-by-one.
As presented in Fig.2, all three encryption methods inevitably
inﬂate the space requirement. Since Paillier encrypts in a one-by-
one manner without batching, the inﬂation ratio stays at around
200×. In contrast, the overhead of CKKS and BFV is drastically
decreased when the scale grows and stabilizes around20×.
Considering the inherent size of modern deep learning models,
it is much more reasonable to encrypt at the vector level.
As a result, we have no choice but to encrypt the selected
weights in a single vector for the practicality. Notice that it’s
impossible to extract a speciﬁc element from the ciphertext
during the aggregation. For example, CKKS encodes a vector of
ﬂoating numbers into a polynomial, and the ciphertext represents
the parameters of the polynomial instead of the value itself.
Therefore, if each client chooses a different mask and uploads
an encrypted vector whose value comes from different positions,
the server will not be able to aggregate them correctly.
B. Mask Consensus
Due to these problems, we argue that individual masking is
not practical in real-world systems, and all the clients should
use thesame encryption mask for the following beneﬁts. If all
the clients encrypt the weights at the same positions, then the
encrypted and unencrypted data are naturally aligned and can be
aggregated separately. Also, the number of encrypted weights
remains unchanged, which means the ciphertext size will be the
same after aggregation.
To make this happen, we introduce a special mechanism called
Mask Consensus to help the clients reach an agreement on the
ﬁnal encryption mask. When each client has determined its
preferred encryption maskmk, it will propose it to the server,
and the server will aggregate all the mask proposals to reach a
consensus. We will detail how the mask is selected in the next
section, but here we introduce an assumption on the client’s
mask proposal in advance.
Assumption 1: Mask mk is a list sorted based on a client’s
preference.
For example, compared with mk[i], the model weight at
position mk[i−1] is considered more important to clientk and
should be encrypted with higher priority.
For the sake of both fairness and efﬁciency, we design the
mask consensus mechanism as Algorithm1. We ﬁrst interleave
all the mask proposalsm1,m2 ...m K into one listm′such that
m′=
[
m1[0],m2[0],...m K[0],m1[1],m2[1],...
]
.
Based on our previous assumption, clients’ preferences are
implied in the order of the mask. Therefore, we can evenly
distribute the quota to each client by simply choosing the topρN
elements. But it is possible that different clients may choose the
same indices, which leads to duplicated values in the selection.
Thus, we ﬁrst remove all the duplicated values inm′, then pick
the topρN elements as the ﬁnal mask¯m and send it to clients
to guide their encryption process.
With a common encryption mask, each clientk can split the
model weights into two disjoint vectors:wk
plain,t for unencrypted
weights whose indices are not inside¯m, andwk
enc,t for weights to
be encrypted. Similarly, the aggregation resultwk
t of this round
also consists of these two vectors. And these two vectors can be
aggregated separately like
wplain,t =
∑
k=1,...,K
pkwk
plain,t,
wenc,t =
∑
k=1,...,K
pkENC(wk
enc,t). (3)
Notice that the summation of the encrypted weights is not
directly adding the ciphertexts together, but evaluating them with
a special function related to the encryption algorithm.
Since the mask consensus procedure introduces extra commu-
nication between server and clients, a concern naturally emerges:
is it safe to do so? If the mask is randomly generated, then there
is nothing to worry about since a random mask doesn’t contain
any information about the training status. Therefore, the security
of mask consensus is determined by the information carried by
the masks, and we will discuss it in SectionIV after we introduce
how mask is selected.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.