HU AND LI: MASKCRYPT: FEDERATED LEARNING WITH SELECTIVE HOMOMORPHIC ENCRYPTION 229
Fig. 3. Communication sizes with different encrypt ratio.
TABLE I
DATASET ANDMODELS USED FOR EVA L UAT I O N
The deep learning models trained on each dataset are listed
in TableI. Notice that the Purchase and Texas datasets share the
3-layer perceptron architecture, yet the total number of weights
are not the same due to different sizes of the input feature.
Training Environment:Our experiments are conducted on a
Ubuntu server equipped with one NVIDIA TITAN V graphic
card, Intel Core i9-9980XE, and 128 GB of physical memory.
We simulated 100 federated learning clients with PLATO, and
20 clients will be selected for local training in each round. The
dataset is randomly and evenly distributed among all the clients.
During the local training phase, each selected client will train
the model using SGD for 5 epochs, with a common batch size
of 32 for all four datasets. The learning rates for𝖯𝗎𝗋𝖼𝗁𝖺𝗌𝖾 and
𝖬𝖭𝖨𝖲𝖳 are set to 0.01, 0.05 for𝖳𝖾𝗑𝖺𝗌 and 0.1 for𝖢𝖨𝖥𝖠𝖱 −10.
Metrics: The performance of MASKCRYPT is evaluated by
the following three metrics: communication size, wall clock
time, and membership inference attack accuracy. The wall clock
time is a feature of PLATO that estimates the actual elapsed time
during federated learning, including both the computation and
communication time. The computation time is directly measured
during runtime, and the communication time is computed by
dividing the communication size by the bandwidth, which is set
to 100 Mbps in our evaluation.
For the membership inference attack, we adopt similar set-
tings in [18] and [19]. To provide more non-member samples
to train the attack model, we use only half of the dataset during
training. The attacker will randomly select 5 clients, attacking
on their exposed model weights and take the average attack
accuracy as the result.
Beside membership inference attack, we also conducted the
data reconstruction attack[3] to further examine the protection
of MASKCRYPT. The attack takes the model updates in a local
training round as the ground truth, and tries to reconstruct the
input image by optimizing a noise input to minimize the distance
between the model updates on the noise input and the ground
truth. Given a white box access to the model updates,[3] is
considered to be the state-of-the-art data reconstruction attack
against federated learning.
B. Experimental Results
Communication overhead:We ﬁrst evaluate the communica-
tion overhead with different encrypt ratios. As presented in Fig.
3, the full weights encryption (i.e.,ρ =1 ) introduces exorbi-
tant communication overhead. For example, the original model
size of ResNet-18 is only 42.7 MB, but can be boosted into
871.94 MB after encryption, and a similar inﬂation ratio is also
observed in other models. But if we decrease the encrypt ratio,
the communication size reduces linearly as expected, e.g., with
an encrypted ratio of 0.2, the communication size of ResNet-18
can be reduced into 209.83 MB, which is an improvement up
to 4.15× compared with full encryption. This veriﬁes the basic
goal of MASKCRYPT — reducing the communication overhead
through sparsity of encryption.
Besides the default CKKS encryption scheme, we also ex-
periment with another encryption algorithm, BFV . Since BFV
only supports integers instead of ﬂoating numbers, we scale the
original model weights by105 times and take the integer part for
encryption, and scale it back after aggregation and decryption.
As illustrated in Fig.3, the ciphertext size of BFV is smaller than
CKKS, and it also decreases linearly with a smaller encrypt ratio.
This shows that our framework is agnostic to the encryption
algorithm and can be combined with any optimization works of
homomorphic encryption to provide a further improvement.
Training efﬁciency: Though we initally introduce MASK-
CRYPT to reduce the communication overhead of homomorphic
encryption, the ultimate goal is to speed up the entire federated
learning process. With the wall clock time simulation feature in
PLATO, we are able to compare the training efﬁciency regarding
the elapsed time, and we present our comparison results in
Fig. 4.
As we explained previously, homomorphic encryption does
not change the value of model weights. Therefore, no matter how
many weights are encrypted, the model can always converge
at the same round. But regarding the actual wall clock time
spent on training, there is an huge gap between the full weights
encryption and no encryption in Fig.4(a), (c), and(d).F o rt h e
𝖬𝖭𝖨𝖲𝖳 dataset, the model is much smaller and the training
time is dominated by computation instead of communication.
Therefore even if we encrypt the entire𝖫𝖾𝖭𝖾𝗍 −5 model, it’s
only 3.1× slower than no encryption. But for the𝖢𝖨𝖥𝖠𝖱 −10,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.