IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025 221
MASKCRYPT: Federated Learning With Selective
Homomorphic Encryption
Chenghao Hu , Member , IEEE, and Baochun Li , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The federated learning paradigm protects private
data from explicit leakage, yet exposing the model weights still
raises serious privacy concerns with well-known attacks, such as
membership inference attacks. It has been acknowledged that
mechanisms such as homomorphic encryption and differential
privacy can be adopted to provide a higher level of protection. How-
ever, these mechanisms may incur a formidable amount of overhead
and reductions in training performance, which make them unlikely
to be employed in real-world applications. In this paper, we propose
MASKCRYPT, a new mechanism designed to balance the trade-off
between security and practicality when homomorphic encryption
is used. Rather than encrypting model updates in their entirety,
MASKCRYPT applies an encryption mask to sift out a small portion
of the updates for encryption. Speciﬁcally, each M ASKCRYPT client
adopts a gradient-guided mechanism to select the encryption mask,
which aims to obfuscate the training trace by maximizing the
local loss value of exposed model weights, and then sending the
individual mask to a special Mask Consensusmechanism to obtain
a ﬁnal mask for all clients. Our experimental results have shown
convincing evidence that with a small encrypt ratio, M ASKCRYPT
reduced the communication overhead by up to 4.15 × compared
with encrypting entire model updates, yet still effectively protected
the client’s private data against inversion attacks, and reduced the
accuracy of membership inference attacks to 49.2 %.
Index Terms—Federated learning, homomorphic encryption,
data privacy, secure aggregation.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
O TAKE full advantage of private data when training
machine learning models, the emerging federated learning
paradigm [1] introduces an appealing solution where clients train
a model locally and absorb knowledge from others by sending
model updates to a server for aggregation. Throughout the entire
training session, only the updated model weights are exchanged
while private data can be secured locally. Consequently, feder-
ated learning allows multiple organizations to collaboratively
train a high-quality machine learning model without exposing
private data. The inherent security of federated learning has
gained a substantial amount of research attention, given its
appeal to ﬁnancial or medical industries where data privacy is a
top priority.
Though vanilla federated learning managed to protect
privacy-sensitive data from explicit leakage, the behavior of
Manuscript received 1 March 2023; revised 10 February 2024; accepted 24
March 2024. Date of publication 22 April 2024; date of current version 16
January 2025.(Corresponding author: Chenghao Hu.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing, University of Toronto, Toronto M5S 2E4, Canada (e-mail: ch.hu@mail.
utoronto.ca; bli@ece.toronto.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TDSC.2024.3392424
exposing model weights still raises serious privacy concerns,
as adversaries can still breach data privacy with sophisticated
attacks such as membership inference [2] and gradient in-
version [3]. When a model is fully trained, it can be easily
overﬁtted to the training data, which could lead to an ex-
plicitly higher conﬁdence that the input data belongs to one
category. The attackers can train a machine learning model to
capture the training trace on the input data, thereby inferring
whether a speciﬁc data sample exists in the training set, or
even reconstruct the original input data from scratch. As a
result, vanilla federated learning is not as secure as we expected
it to be.
To provide a higher level of security, it is a natural idea to block
the server’s access to original model weights, which introduces
the combination of federated learning with a wide range of
security mechanisms [4]. For example, clients can perturb the
locally trained model weights by adding noise with adifferential
privacy mechanism [5], [6] before sending them for aggregation.
However, adding noise is double-edged. Though the added noise
prevents the server from obtaining the exact model weights
trained on a client’s private data, it inevitably degrades the
validation accuracy of the converged global model[7], which
is a key metric used for evaluating the training performance in
federated learning.
A noteworthy alternative to differential privacy ishomomor-
phic encryption[8], [9], [10], which allows certain mathematical
operations — such as addition and scalar multiplication — to
be performed on the ciphertext, and still yields correct results
after decryption. With homomorphic encryption, the clients can
encrypt their local model weights before sending them to the
server, where models can be directly aggregated on the cipher-
text. In this process, the server learns nothing about either the
locally trained or the global aggregated model.
However, most existing homomorphic encryption mecha-
nisms in the context of federated learning incurred an exorbitant
amount of communication overhead[11]. Compared with the
original message, model updates can be inﬂated to tens or even
hundreds of times after encryption. Without a doubt, such com-
munication overhead is not acceptable in real-world federated
learning systems, especially when clients are geographically
distributed. Recent work[12] tried to alleviate this problem by
reducing the overall ciphertext size through a batching tech-
nique. Nonetheless, considering that millions of weights are
routinely used in modern deep learning models, we argue that a
further reduction of the communication overhead is needed for
real-world deployments.
1545-5971 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.