HU AND LI: MASKCRYPT: FEDERATED LEARNING WITH SELECTIVE HOMOMORPHIC ENCRYPTION 231
Fig. 6. Reconstructed input images under model updates inversion attack. The horse comes from CIFAR10 dataset and the handwritten digit 3 comes from
MNIST.
As presented in Fig.6, without encryption, the inversion attack
successfully reconstructed input images with extremely high ﬁ-
delity on both the𝖢𝖨𝖥𝖠𝖱10 and 𝖬𝖭𝖨𝖲𝖳 datasets, demonstrating
the effectiveness of reconstruction attacks. However, with just
1% of updates encrypted, MASKCRYPT provided robust defense.
The reconstructed images were completely unrecognizable, con-
sisting of barely more than random pixels, and not to mention
the higher encrypt ratios.
Simply increasing the percentage of encrypted weights does
not necessarily improve defense. With randomly selected en-
cryption masks, we found that even with 16% updates encryp-
tion, the attack can still recover substantial image details from
the updates. This highlights the importance of our proposed
gradient-guided mask selection algorithm for determining which
weights to encrypt. When used as small as 1% encryption, this
algorithm allowed MASKCRYPT to completely obscure recon-
struction attacks.
C. Experimenting With Transformer Models
In addition to the ML models that we evaluated earlier, we
also applied MASKCRYPT on 𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2, a large-scale language
model based on the Transformer architecture. Transformer mod-
els are typically large, requiring a substantial amount of re-
sources to train. In our experiment, we trained the𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2
model using the Tiny-Shakespeare dataset, involving a total of 5
clients, among which 3 of them are selected for training in each
round.
Similar to our previous experiments, we ﬁrst show the com-
munication size of 𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2 in Fig. 7(b). The base size of
𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2 is 465.74 MB without any encryption, and if we
encrypt the entire model, the communication size expands to
more than 10 GB per client per round, which means the full
Fig. 7. Training efﬁciency of DistilGPT2.
encryption scheme is far from practical in training huge models.
Still, MASKCRYPT managed to reduce the communication size
linearly with a smaller encrypt ratio, i.e., 4.3× reduction if we
only encrypt 20% of the weights.
Compared with a vanilla federated learning process, the en-
cryption of model weights introduces extra computation over-
head, which is relatively negligible with small models. For ex-
ample, the computation time is included in the overall wall-clock
time in Fig.4. In contrast, for large scale models like transformer
models, the cryptographic operations also take a considerable
time due to the increased encryption scale.
As presented in Fig.7(a), if we choose to encrypt the en-
tire 𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2 model in a single federated learning round, it
takes about 3 minutes for clients to decrypt the model weights
before it can proceed to local training, 6 minutes to encrypt
all the weights of 𝖣𝗂𝗌𝗍𝗂𝗅𝖦𝖯𝖳2. And ﬁnally, the server needs
7.7 minutes to aggregate the encrypted weights from 3 clients,
which can be even longer if more participants are aggregated.
Similar to the communication size, MASKCRYPT reduces the
computation time linearly, down to a relatively acceptable range
by shrinking the encryption scale.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Estadual de Campinas. Downloaded on December 18,2025 at 00:26:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.